INTERLUDE E: Memories of Past Life: Fossils and Evolution

MULTIPLE CHOICE

1. Petrified wood is a type of ________.
a. permineralized organism
c. trace fossil
b. chemical fossil
d. body fossil preserved in tar


ANS:ADIF:EasyREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Remembering

2. What type of fossil is composed of footprints or burrows?
a. mold or cast
c. trace fossil
b. chemical fossil
d. body fossil


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Remembering

3. Which of the following statements regarding the fossil record is FALSE?
a. Only some of Earth’s history is recorded in the rock record.
b. The fossil record does not contain any fossil remains of plants, only animals.
c. Many organisms have a low preservation potential.
d. Paleontologists have not yet found all the fossils that are in rocks.


ANS:BDIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Understanding

4. Which of the following would NOT be considered a fossil?

a. Figure 1
c. Figure 3
b. Figure 2
d. Figure 4


ANS:DDIF:EasyREF:E.1
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Applying

5. Which of the following scenarios would most likely result in fossilization?
a. Leaves fall to the forest floor during winter.
b. A dinosaur walks across an outcrop of sandstone.
c. A jellyfish is buried by a submarine landslide.
d. Plankton get washed onto the beach during a storm.


ANS:CDIF:DifficultREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Applying

6. Why do plants generally become carbonized impressions if they are preserved as fossils?
a. because chemical reactions leave behind only the carbon
b. because they are often decayed before fossilization
c. because they are easily moved by winds and water
d. because they are generally scavenged by animals


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.MSC:Analyzing

7. Fossils of ________ are known as extraordinary fossils.
a. hard parts
c. bones
b. soft parts
d. teeth


ANS:BDIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand that it takes special conditions for an organism to be preserved as a fossil, so it’s not surprising that the record of known fossils is very incomplete.
MSC:Remembering

8. Organisms buried in ________ environments are more likely to be preserved because they will not undergo decay.
a. anoxic
c. oxygenated
b. antioxidant
d. vegetated


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand that it takes special conditions for an organism to be preserved as a fossil, so it’s not surprising that the record of known fossils is very incomplete.
MSC:Remembering

9. Why is the preservation potential of feathers so low?
a. because birds usually die in dry environments
b. because feathers do not contain hard parts
c. because feathers are very small and thus are not well preserved
d. because birds die in forests, areas with high oxygen levels


ANS:BDIF:DifficultREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand that it takes special conditions for an organism to be preserved as a fossil, so it’s not surprising that the record of known fossils is very incomplete.
MSC:Understanding

10. Imagine that a layer of leaves is scattered along a forest floor; what must happen in order to preserve these leaves as fossils?
a. The leaves must be picked up by wind or animals and carried to a desert.
b. The leaves must be buried slowly so that the leaves can begin to rot.
c. The leaves must be buried rapidly in order to keep out oxygen.
d. The leaves will never be preserved, as they do not contain hard parts.


ANS:CDIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand that it takes special conditions for an organism to be preserved as a fossil, so it’s not surprising that the record of known fossils is very incomplete.
MSC:Applying

11. The most general distinction among organisms is based on differences in DNA and is called the ________.
a. kingdom
c. domain
b. phylum
d. species


ANS:CDIF:ModerateREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Remembering

12. Mammals belong to the kingdom ________.
a. Protista
c. Eukarya
b. Mammalia
d. Animalia


ANS:DDIF:ModerateREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Remembering

13. Fossils are most often identified based on changes in their ________, which is easily recognizable, even in the field.
a. morphology
c. domain
b. DNA
d. lifestyle


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Understanding

14. To which major kingdom would a bivalve belong?
a. Protista
c. Plantae
b. Animalia
d. Fungi


ANS:BDIF:EasyREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Applying

15. The following is an example of what type of fossil?

a. trace fossil
c. carbonized impression
b. permineralized organism
d. mold or cast fossil


ANS:BDIF:ModerateREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Applying

16. If two animals are members of the same kingdom, how closely are they related in comparison to two animals that are members of the same genus?
a. Animals of the same kingdom are less closely related than those of the same genus.
b. Animals of the same kingdom are more closely related than those of the same genus.
c. There is no way to tell how closely related either are without more information.
d. Animals of the same kingdom are not related at all.


ANS:ADIF:DifficultREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Analyzing

17. What is natural selection?
a. the theory that all life began in shallow coastal pools of protein-rich water
b. the theory that all life on Earth has evolved from single-celled organisms
c. the idea that animals who share specialized characteristics are part of a genus
d. the passing on of beneficial characteristics so that the most adaptable survive


ANS:DDIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand the fundamental principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection.
MSC:Remembering

18. Darwin believed that the finches on the Galapagos Islands were once a single species but had ________ into several different species that could each eat different types of food.
a. regressed
c. evolved
b. reverted
d. relapsed


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand the fundamental principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection.
MSC:Understanding

19. Isolating a breeding population of animals can lead to evolution by ________.
a. gradualism
c. survivability
b. punctuated equilibrium
d. natural equilibrium


ANS:BDIF:DifficultREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand the fundamental principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection.
MSC:Understanding

20. Which of the following is an example of natural selection?
a. birds that evolve a new beak shape in order to exploit a different food source
b. the extinction of the mammoths due to hunting by a new predator
c. fossils of trilobites that have the same morphology but are separated by millions of years
d. the mass extinction of the dinosaurs due to a meteorite’s impact 65 million years ago


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand the fundamental principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection.
MSC:Applying

21. When the last member of a species dies, this is called ________.
a. fossilization
c. extinction
b. natural selection
d. preservation


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Remembering

22. A change in ________ can often cause mass extinctions of animals that are adapted to warm, tropical waters.
a. global climate
c. biodiversity
b. tectonic activity
d. food sources


ANS:ADIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Understanding

23. The mammoths went extinct due to a new predator, ________.
a. dinosaurs
c. chimpanzees
b. elephants
d. humans


ANS:DDIF:EasyREF:E.2
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Understanding

24. According to the figure below, which mass extinction was the most devastating?

a. Permian/Triassic
c. Cretaceous/Tertiary
b. Ordovician/Silurian
d. Late Devonian


ANS:ADIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Applying

25. If a volcanic eruption occurs that blocks out some of the sunlight long enough for many plants to die, what (if anything) will happen to the carnivorous animal species?
a. They will eventually die along with many other species in the food chain.
b. The carnivorous animals will need to adapt to eat other plant species.
c. They will die from the drop in temperature before the plant deaths affect them.
d. Nothing will happen; carnivorous animals will not be affected by plant death.


ANS:ADIF:DifficultREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Analyzing

SHORT ANSWER

1. Explain how the leaves in the image below were formed.


ANS:
The leaves died and fell off the plant and were buried by layers of sediment; the organic material decayed and left a thin film of carbon in the shape of the original leaves.

DIF:EasyREF:E.2OBJ:Understand what a fossil is, and how fossils form.
MSC:Applying

2. Explain why the fossil record is incomplete.

ANS:
The fossil record is incomplete because not all organisms are preserved. The majority of fossils 
are of organisms with hard parts, and thus we are missing many soft-bodied organisms. In addition, organisms must be subjected to specific conditions in order to be preserved, and thus very few organisms overall are preserved. Lastly, we have simply not found every fossil on Earth yet.

DIF:ModerateREF:E.4
OBJ:Understand that it takes special conditions for an organism to be preserved as a fossil, so it’s not surprising that the record of known fossils is very incomplete.
MSC:Understanding

3. Label each fossil in the image below with the common fossil name.


ANS:
See image below for answer.


DIF:ModerateREF:E.3
OBJ:Understand how fossils are classified, according to the rules of taxonomy, and the names of common fossils.MSC:Applying

4. Explain how evolution by natural selection occurs.

ANS:
Organisms that are best adapted to survive in their environment will be the only ones that will be able to reproduce and pass on their genetic traits to their offspring. Thus, those that are “the fittest” will survive and the weakest will die off.

DIF:ModerateREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand the fundamental principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection.
MSC:Understanding

5. How is mass extinction different from extinction?

ANS:
An extinction occurs when the last member of a species dies. A mass extinction occurs when a large number of organisms die at once.

DIF:EasyREF:E.5
OBJ:Understand what extinction is, what mass extinctions are, and why mass extinctions may take place.MSC:Analyzing
