INTERLUDE C: The Rock Cycle

MULTIPLE CHOICE

1. Rocks are often recycled in a series of processes known collectively as the ________.
a. rock circle
c. recycling path
b. rock cycle
d. recycling procession


ANS:BDIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand that rocks don’t last forever because the Earth System is dynamic.
MSC:Remembering

2. Which of the following statements best describes the rock cycle?
a. Any rock can change into another rock based on the conditions to which the rock is subjected.
b. Rocks change to other rocks based on specific pathways that must be followed.
c. Rocks can change rock type but cannot be recycled into the same type they started as.
d. Rocks move in set paths that were determined when the rock was first formed.


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand that rocks don’t last forever because the Earth System is dynamic.
MSC:Understanding

3. Mountain ranges contain some of the oldest rocks found on Earth. What is the likely fate of these old rocks?
a. They will remain unchanged forever.
b. They will be eroded away to form new rocks.
c. They will be melted and erupted out of volcanoes.
d. They will be eroded but will remain the same rocks.


ANS:BDIF:EasyREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand that rocks don’t last forever because the Earth System is dynamic.
MSC:Applying

4. The oldest material found on Earth is a zircon grain that is 4.12 Ga. How come there are no rocks that are the same age as Earth (4.54 Ga)?
a. We just have not found them yet.
b. No rocks formed during that time.
c. All rocks from that age have been recycled.
d. Earth is not that old.


ANS:CDIF:DifficultREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand that rocks don’t last forever because the Earth System is dynamic.
MSC:Applying

5. ________ is a process that contributes to the formation of melt in Earth.
a. Metamorphism
c. Erosion
b. Lithification
d. Subduction


ANS:DDIF:ModerateREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand why phenomena such as weathering, burial, heating, and/or melting can affect rock after it has formed.MSC:Remembering

6. Weathering of rocks produces ________, which can then be incorporated into ________ rocks.
a. crystals; all types of
c. sediments; metamorphic
b. crystals; igneous
d. sediments; sedimentary


ANS:DDIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand why phenomena such as weathering, burial, heating, and/or melting can affect rock after it has formed.MSC:Understanding

7. Burial of rocks can subject them to high heat and pressure, which can alter the ________ of the rocks.
a. mineral assemblage
c. chemical content
b. elemental composition
d. crystal fractionation


ANS:ADIF:DifficultREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand why phenomena such as weathering, burial, heating, and/or melting can affect rock after it has formed.MSC:Understanding

8. Identify which of the following paths could eventually transform a metamorphic rock into a sedimentary rock.
a. erosion and deposition → burial → melting
b. burial → erosion and deposition → melting
c. burial → melting → erosion and deposition
d. melting → erosion and deposition → melting


ANS:CDIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why phenomena such as weathering, burial, heating, and/or melting can affect rock after it has formed.MSC:Applying

9. What is the name of the cycle shown in the picture?

a. hydrologic cycle
c. rock cycle
b. erosion cycle
d. carbon cycle


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand how components of a given rock may become incorporated in other rocks or even other rock classes, over time, in a progression of change called the rock cycle.
MSC:Remembering

10. What is the rock cycle?
a. the cycle that rocks go through when interacting with water
b. the transformation of one mineral type to another
c. the transformation of one rock type to another
d. the cycle that rocks undergo when interacting with air


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand how components of a given rock may become incorporated in other rocks or even other rock classes, over time, in a progression of change called the rock cycle.
MSC:Understanding

11. If a limestone is metamorphosed into a marble, the ________ that made up the limestone will also make up the marble.
a. minerals
c. laminations
b. fossils
d. impurities


ANS:ADIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand how components of a given rock may become incorporated in other rocks or even other rock classes, over time, in a progression of change called the rock cycle.
MSC:Applying

12. Why is the rock cycle important?
a. because it describes how water and rocks interact within Earth to produce melt
b. because it describes how rocks move throughout Earth’s ocean basins
c. because it explains how long rocks have existed on this planet
d. because it explains how rocks are constantly changing from one type to another


ANS:DDIF:ModerateREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand how components of a given rock may become incorporated in other rocks or even other rock classes, over time, in a progression of change called the rock cycle.
MSC:Analyzing

13. If a rock is buried but not melted it will become a(n) ________ rock.
a. igneous
c. sedimentary
b. metamorphic
d. metasomatic


ANS:BDIF:EasyREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Remembering

14. If an igneous rock is heated and melted it will form a(n) ________ rock.
a. igneous
c. sedimentary
b. metamorphic
d. magmatic


ANS:ADIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Remembering

15. What must happen in order to transform a metamorphic rock into a sedimentary rock?
a. formation of a volcano
c. burial of metamorphic rocks
b. mountain building
d. subduction of oceanic crust


ANS:BDIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Understanding

16. What are the correct steps in the transformation of a sedimentary rock into a metamorphic rock?
a. rock eroded away and deposited in ocean basin → rock pulled into subduction zone and melted
b. rock eroded away and deposited in ocean basin → rock buried under many layers of sediments
c. rock eroded away and deposited in ocean basin → volcano erupts through ocean floor and melts rocks
d. rock eroded away and deposited in alluvial fan → rock buried deeply and melted by intrusion


ANS:BDIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Applying

17. Why does uplifting metamorphic rocks during mountain building lead to the formation of sedimentary rocks?
a. because water cannot penetrate the ground
b. because metamorphic rocks can only be eroded by air
c. because the rocks become exposed to the elements and erode
d. because metamorphic rocks are only found under mountains


ANS:CDIF:DifficultREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Analyzing

18. The rate at which rocks follow the various pathways through the rock cycle is ________.
a. usually slow
c. always the same
b. usually fast
d. vastly different


ANS:DDIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand that steps of the rock cycle can happen at vastly different rates.
MSC:Remembering

19. The eruption and cooling of an igneous rock occurs ________, while the processes of erosion, deposition, and lithification happen ________.
a. underground; above ground
c. quickly; slowly
b. above ground; underground
d. slowly; quickly


ANS:CDIF:EasyREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand that steps of the rock cycle can happen at vastly different rates.
MSC:Understanding

20. Which of the following scenarios would likely occur at a slower rate?
a. erosion of an outcrop of quartz-cemented sandstone
b. erosion of an outcrop of shale
c. erosion of an outcrop of calcite-cemented sandstone
d. erosion of an outcrop of rock salt


ANS:ADIF:EasyREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand that steps of the rock cycle can happen at vastly different rates.
MSC:Applying

21. Why have many Precambrian rocks remained unchanged for billions of years?
a. They are so old that they have not had time to move past the first stage.
b. They are protected within the interiors of the continents.
c. They are only found in Antarctica and thus are not exposed to erosion.
d. They are metamorphic rocks that are too hard to be transformed.


ANS:BDIF:DifficultREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand that steps of the rock cycle can happen at vastly different rates.
MSC:Analyzing

22. ________ rocks is controlled in some areas by the subduction of plates.
a. Eroding
c. Depositing
b. Melting
d. Weathering


ANS:BDIF:EasyREF:C.3
OBJ:Understand how energy from inside the Earth, from the Sun, and from gravity drive the rock cycle.MSC:Remembering

23. Many ________ processes are controlled by the Sun and gravity.
a. igneous
c. sedimentary
b. metamorphic
d. rock melting


ANS:CDIF:ModerateREF:C.3
OBJ:Understand how energy from inside the Earth, from the Sun, and from gravity drive the rock cycle.MSC:Remembering

24. The rock cycle does not occur on the Moon because ________.
a. the Moon does not have gravity
b. the Moon does not receive sunlight
c. there is no plate tectonics on the Moon
d. there are only sedimentary rocks on the Moon


ANS:CDIF:DifficultREF:C.3
OBJ:Understand how energy from inside the Earth, from the Sun, and from gravity drive the rock cycle.MSC:Understanding

25. Which of the following sources of energy is responsible for erosion?
a. the Moon
c. gravity
b. Earth’s internal heat
d. pressure


ANS:BDIF:DifficultREF:C.3
OBJ:Understand how energy from inside the Earth, from the Sun, and from gravity drive the rock cycle.MSC:Applying

SHORT ANSWER

1. Why are there so few Precambrian-age rocks found on Earth?

ANS:
The Earth’s surface was molten during the very Early Precambrian and thus any rocks that were formed were quickly remelted. In addition, any rocks formed in the Precambrian have been subjected to the rock cycle for billions of years and are very likely to have been reformed many times over.

DIF:EasyREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand that rocks don’t last forever because the Earth System is dynamic.
MSC:Understanding

2. Label the image below with the processes that occur along pathways in the rock cycle. Make sure that you label every arrow with the correct process.


ANS:
Answer should be as shown in the image below.


DIF:ModerateREF:C.1
OBJ:Understand how components of a given rock may become incorporated in other rocks or even other rock classes, over time, in a progression of change called the rock cycle.
MSC:Applying

3. Describe the changes that occur (i.e., what happens to the rock) along a pathway through the rock cycle as seen below: 
Sedimentary rock ◊ Igneous rock ◊ Sedimentary rock ◊ Metamorphic rock

ANS:
First, sediment is deposited, buried, and lithified. Second, the sedimentary rock is subduced down into the mantle and melted. The melt ascends through the mantle and into the crust and is erupted at the surface. Third, the igneous rock is weathered, eroded, transported, deposited, and lithified. Lastly, the sedimentary rocks are caught and uplifted during orogeny and subjected to high heat and differential stress to form metamorphic rocks.

DIF:EasyREF:C.1 | C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Applying

4. Describe how the rock cycle is linked to plate tectonics.

ANS:
Answers for this will vary. However, students should mention that subduction and mountain building produce igneous and metamorphic rocks and are the direct result of plate tectonics. They should also address that many of the sedimentary processes are linked to plate tectonics, such as weathering and erosion, which occur during orogenesis. They may also mention that many sedimentary basins are formed by plate tectonics processes and thus deposition and lithification are linked to plate tectonics as well.

DIF:ModerateREF:C.2
OBJ:Understand why pathways through the rock cycle reflect geologic settings, interpretable in the context of plate tectonics.MSC:Understanding

5. Describe how energy from the Sun and gravity are responsible for many sedimentary processes, such as weathering, erosion, deposition, and so on.

ANS:
The Sun fuels changes in the climate and weather that in turn control the rate of weathering and the amount of rainfall that can become runoff, which controls erosion and deposition. It is the pull of gravity that controls erosion and deposition and the amount of compaction due to overlying sediments.

DIF:DifficultREF:C.3
OBJ:Understand how energy from inside the Earth, from the Sun, and from gravity drive the rock cycle.MSC:Analyzing
